README.md, before:

# yavge

Yet Another Voxel Game Engine, or Yet Another Voxel Graphics Engine. The choice is yours.

This was created using OpenGL 4.5 and the direct state access (DSA) API as opposed to the "binding" API of OpenGL 3.3.

## Building and Running

Requires conan w/ bincrafters and cmake.

### Linux

To build, at the root of the project:

```sh
# First time only (Installs dependencies)
sh scripts/build.sh install 

# Subsequent times
sh scripts/build.sh 
```

To run, at the root of the project:

```sh
sh scripts/run.sh
```

To build and run in release mode, simply add the `release` suffix:

```sh
sh scripts/build.sh release
sh scripts/run.sh release
```

## Screenshots

In order of features added:

### Phong Lighting (Base)

![Phong Lighting](/Screenshots/Base.png "Phong Lighting")

### Reflection and Refraction

![Reflection and Refraction](/Screenshots/ReflectRefractMaps.png "Reflection and Refraction")

### Fresnel Effect

![Fresnel Effect](/Screenshots/FresnelEffect.png "Fresnel Effect")

### Distort Maps (AKA DU/DV maps)

![Distort Maps](/Screenshots/DUDVMaps.png "Distort Maps")

### Normal Maps

![Normal Maps](/Screenshots/NormalMaps.png "Normal Maps")

## Mistakes Were Made...

As this was my first time using DSA and more advanced computer graphics techniques, I ran into problems, which will be listed here so I don't run into them again:

### 2D array texture

With non-dsa, it seemed OK to create the 2D Array Texture as below:

```cpp
glBindTexture(GL_TEXTURE_2D_ARRAY, m_handle)
// set up texture params here
glTexImage3D(GL_TEXTURE_2D_ARRAY, 0, GL_RGBA, textureSize, textureSize,
             numTextures, 0, GL_RGBA, GL_UNSIGNED_BYTE, nullptr);
```

Where textureSize is the width and height value and "numTextures" is the maximum number of textures this particular texture array would support.

With DSA, the equal would be something like:

```cpp
// no binding needed!
// set up texture params here
glTextureStorage3D(m_handle, 0, GL_RGBA, textureSize, textureSize, numTextures);
```

However, the issue with this approach is the first and second args, which must be replaced with 1 and GL_RGBA8 respectively:

```cpp
glTextureStorage3D(m_handle, 1, GL_RGBA8, textureSize, textureSize, numTextures);
```

The reasons become clear by looking at the docs:

https://www.khronos.org/registry/OpenGL-Refpages/gl4/html/glTexImage3D.xhtml

https://www.khronos.org/registry/OpenGL-Refpages/gl4/html/glTexStorage3D.xhtml


### Depth Texture 

At some point I was playing around with depth textures, and struggled to render them.

It turns out the fragment shader must select a single channel from the sampled texture and amplified to actually see it (As without the differences are too small to see).

For example, typical texture mapping is (Where `tex` is a `uniform sampler2D` and `texCoord` is a vec2 for the texuture coords):

```glsl
void main() { 
    outColour = texture(tex, texCoord);
}
```

However this results in a pure red texture. In order to actually see the depth, the red channel must be extracted and amped as follows:

```glsl
void main() { 
    float depth = texture(tex, texCoord).r;
    depth = 1.0 - (1.0 - depth) * 50.0;
    outColour = vec4(depth);
}
```

### Multiple texture units

Given a shader has multiple texture units:

```glsl
uniform sampler2D tex0;
uniform sampler2D tex1;
```

In pre-dsa, this worked like:

```cpp
glUniform1i(glGetUniformLocation(program, "tex0"), 0);
glUniform1i(glGetUniformLocation(program, "tex1"), 1);

// ...

glActiveTexture(GL_TEXTURE0);
glBindTexture(GL_TEXTURE_2D, tex0);

glActiveTexture(GL_TEXTURE1);
glBindTexture(GL_TEXTURE_2D, tex1);
```

Which results with textures being mapped to the correct texture unit.

In DSA, the equal might appear to be:

```cpp
glUniform1i(glGetUniformLocation(program, "tex0"), 0);
glUniform1i(glGetUniformLocation(program, "tex1"), 1);

// ...

glBindTextureUnit(0, tex0);
glBindTextureUnit(1, tex1);
```

However this will not work. Instead the shader are able to mapped to texture unit directly, which also means the `glUniform1i`/`glGetUniformLocation` is no longer needed, as OpenGL is able to work out the correct mapping from the first arg of `glBindTextureUnit`:


```glsl
layout(binding = 0) uniform sampler2D tex0;
layout(binding = 1) uniform sampler2D tex1;
```

```cpp
glBindTextureUnit(0, tex0);
glBindTextureUnit(1, tex1);
```

Which will then result in correct textures being used.

### Mipmaps

Before DSA, it was not really needed to specify number of mipmaps:

```cpp
glTexImage2D(GL_TEXTURE_2D, 0, GL_RGBA8, width, height, 0, GL_BGRA, GL_UNSIGNED_BYTE, pixels);
glGenerateMipmap(GL_TEXTURE_2D);  
glTexParameteri(GL_TEXTURE_2D, GL_TEXTURE_MIN_FILTER, GL_LINEAR_MIPMAP_LINEAR);
// ... etc ...
```

With DSA, this must be specified in the second argument of glTextureStorage<>D

For example:
```cpp
glTextureStorage2D(m_handle, 10, GL_RGBA8, width, height);
glGenerateMipmap(GL_TEXTURE_2D);  
glTexParameteri(GL_TEXTURE_2D, GL_TEXTURE_MIN_FILTER, GL_LINEAR_MIPMAP_LINEAR);
// ... etc ...
```

Which will then generate 10 mip maps levels. However, this number depends on the texture size. A smaller texture will not allow that many mip maps to be generated, and will instead render as black at far distances.

Commit message:

Update README and add project files

README.md, after:

# yavge

Yet Another Voxel Game Engine, or Yet Another Voxel Graphics Engine. The choice is yours.

This was created using OpenGL 4.5 and the direct state access (DSA) API as opposed to the "binding" API of OpenGL 3.3.

## Building and Running

### Windows (Visual Studio)

The easiest way to build is to use [vcpkg](https://vcpkg.io/en/index.html) and install libraries through this:

```bash
vcpkg install sfml
vcpkg install glm
vcpkg integrate install
```

Then open the Visual Studio project file, and it should build.

### Linux

Requires conan.

```sh
python3 -m pip install conan==1.61.0
```

To build, at the root of the project:

```sh
sh scripts/build.sh install
```

The install argument is only needed for the first time compilation as this is what grabs the libraries from Conan.

So after the first time, you can simply run:

```
sh scripts/build.sh
```

To run, at the root of the project:

```sh
sh scripts/run.sh
```

To build and run in release mode, simply add the `release` suffix:

```sh
sh scripts/build.sh release
sh scripts/run.sh release
```

## Screenshots

In order of features added:

### Phong Lighting (Base)

![Phong Lighting](/Screenshots/Base.png "Phong Lighting")

### Reflection and Refraction

![Reflection and Refraction](/Screenshots/ReflectRefractMaps.png "Reflection and Refraction")

### Fresnel Effect

![Fresnel Effect](/Screenshots/FresnelEffect.png "Fresnel Effect")

### Distort Maps (AKA DU/DV maps)

![Distort Maps](/Screenshots/DUDVMaps.png "Distort Maps")

### Normal Maps

![Normal Maps](/Screenshots/NormalMaps.png "Normal Maps")

## Mistakes Were Made...

As this was my first time using DSA and more advanced computer graphics techniques, I ran into problems, which will be listed here so I don't run into them again:

### 2D array texture

With non-dsa, it seemed OK to create the 2D Array Texture as below:

```cpp
glBindTexture(GL_TEXTURE_2D_ARRAY, m_handle)
// set up texture params here
glTexImage3D(GL_TEXTURE_2D_ARRAY, 0, GL_RGBA, textureSize, textureSize,
             numTextures, 0, GL_RGBA, GL_UNSIGNED_BYTE, nullptr);
```

Where textureSize is the width and height value and "numTextures" is the maximum number of textures this particular texture array would support.

With DSA, the equal would be something like:

```cpp
// no binding needed!
// set up texture params here
glTextureStorage3D(m_handle, 0, GL_RGBA, textureSize, textureSize, numTextures);
```

However, the issue with this approach is the first and second args, which must be replaced with 1 and GL_RGBA8 respectively:

```cpp
glTextureStorage3D(m_handle, 1, GL_RGBA8, textureSize, textureSize, numTextures);
```

The reasons become clear by looking at the docs:

https://www.khronos.org/registry/OpenGL-Refpages/gl4/html/glTexImage3D.xhtml

https://www.khronos.org/registry/OpenGL-Refpages/gl4/html/glTexStorage3D.xhtml


### Depth Texture 

At some point I was playing around with depth textures, and struggled to render them.

It turns out the fragment shader must select a single channel from the sampled texture and amplified to actually see it (As without the differences are too small to see).

For example, typical texture mapping is (Where `tex` is a `uniform sampler2D` and `texCoord` is a vec2 for the texuture coords):

```glsl
void main() { 
    outColour = texture(tex, texCoord);
}
```

However this results in a pure red texture. In order to actually see the depth, the red channel must be extracted and amped as follows:

```glsl
void main() { 
    float depth = texture(tex, texCoord).r;
    depth = 1.0 - (1.0 - depth) * 50.0;
    outColour = vec4(depth);
}
```

### Multiple texture units

Given a shader has multiple texture units:

```glsl
uniform sampler2D tex0;
uniform sampler2D tex1;
```

In pre-dsa, this worked like:

```cpp
glUniform1i(glGetUniformLocation(program, "tex0"), 0);
glUniform1i(glGetUniformLocation(program, "tex1"), 1);

// ...

glActiveTexture(GL_TEXTURE0);
glBindTexture(GL_TEXTURE_2D, tex0);

glActiveTexture(GL_TEXTURE1);
glBindTexture(GL_TEXTURE_2D, tex1);
```

Which results with textures being mapped to the correct texture unit.

In DSA, the equal might appear to be:

```cpp
glUniform1i(glGetUniformLocation(program, "tex0"), 0);
glUniform1i(glGetUniformLocation(program, "tex1"), 1);

// ...

glBindTextureUnit(0, tex0);
glBindTextureUnit(1, tex1);
```

However this will not work. Instead the shader are able to mapped to texture unit directly, which also means the `glUniform1i`/`glGetUniformLocation` is no longer needed, as OpenGL is able to work out the correct mapping from the first arg of `glBindTextureUnit`:


```glsl
layout(binding = 0) uniform sampler2D tex0;
layout(binding = 1) uniform sampler2D tex1;
```

```cpp
glBindTextureUnit(0, tex0);
glBindTextureUnit(1, tex1);
```

Which will then result in correct textures being used.

### Mipmaps

Before DSA, it was not really needed to specify number of mipmaps:

```cpp
glTexImage2D(GL_TEXTURE_2D, 0, GL_RGBA8, width, height, 0, GL_BGRA, GL_UNSIGNED_BYTE, pixels);
glGenerateMipmap(GL_TEXTURE_2D);  
glTexParameteri(GL_TEXTURE_2D, GL_TEXTURE_MIN_FILTER, GL_LINEAR_MIPMAP_LINEAR);
// ... etc ...
```

With DSA, this must be specified in the second argument of glTextureStorage<>D

For example:
```cpp
glTextureStorage2D(m_handle, 10, GL_RGBA8, width, height);
glGenerateMipmap(GL_TEXTURE_2D);  
glTexParameteri(GL_TEXTURE_2D, GL_TEXTURE_MIN_FILTER, GL_LINEAR_MIPMAP_LINEAR);
// ... etc ...
```

Which will then generate 10 mip maps levels. However, this number depends on the texture size. A smaller texture will not allow that many mip maps to be generated, and will instead render as black at far distances.
